Pipeline Walkthrough
====================

All steps are driven by a single config YAML. Copy and edit ``config/default.yaml`` for each experiment:

.. code-block:: bash

   cp config/default.yaml config/my_run.yaml
   # edit project.data_root, project.out_root, preprocess.uni_weights, etc.

Use ``--dry-run`` to preview commands without executing:

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat <step> --config config/my_run.yaml --dry-run

Data Requirements
-----------------

User-provided inputs (per sample)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   <data_root>/<SAMPLE>/
   ├── he_raw.<tif|svs|jpg>           <- raw H&E image
   │
   │   -- Visium-specific --
   ├── filtered_feature_bc_matrix/    <- 10x Space Ranger output
   ├── spatial/                       <- scalefactors_json.json + tissue_positions_list.csv
   │
   │   -- Xenium-specific --
   ├── xenium_raw/                    <- 10x Xenium output (cell_feature_matrix.h5, cells.parquet)
   ├── adata_cellbin_HistoSweep.h5ad  <- cell-bin AnnData with bin-to-pixel location mapping
   └── annotation.csv                 <- cell-type annotations (columns: cell_id, cell_state)

Preparing ``adata_cellbin_HistoSweep.h5ad``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This file bridges H&E image space and Xenium DAPI space:

1. Run ``meowcat preprocess`` to generate ``single_super_emb.h5ad``
2. Align the H&E image to the Xenium DAPI image (coordinate transformation from H&E pixel space to DAPI pixel space)
3. Apply the transformation to each superpixel's ``.obsm['spatial']`` coordinates
4. Save as ``adata_cellbin_HistoSweep.h5ad`` with transformed coordinates in ``.obsm['transformed_pxl_loc_in_morphology']``

.. list-table:: Required slots in ``adata_cellbin_HistoSweep.h5ad``
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 20 50

   * - Slot
     - Shape
     - Description
   * - ``.obs_names``
     - ``(n_bins,)``
     - Superpixel/bin IDs — **must match** ``single_super_emb.h5ad`` ``.obs_names``
   * - ``.X``
     - ``(n_bins, n_genes)``
     - Gene expression matrix for bins
   * - ``.obsm['transformed_pxl_loc_in_morphology']``
     - ``(n_bins, 2)``
     - Superpixel XY coords in DAPI pixel space
   * - ``.obsm['histology_2048']`` *(optional)*
     - ``(n_bins, 2048)``
     - UNI histology features; auto-loaded from ``single_super_emb.h5ad`` if absent

Generated by the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do NOT create these manually — they are written by the pipeline steps:

.. code-block:: text

   <data_root>/<SAMPLE>/
   ├── pixel-size-raw.txt       <- raw MPP from image metadata
   ├── pixel-size.txt           <- target MPP
   ├── embeddings-hist.pickle or .npy  <- UNI features [H, W, C]
   ├── mask/
   │   ├── mask.png             <- tissue mask (full resolution)
   │   └── mask-small.png       <- tissue mask (downsampled)
   │
   │   -- Visium only --
   ├── deconvolution_rctd/
   │   └── major_prop.csv       <- RCTD cell-type proportions
   ├── anno-names.txt           <- cell-type names
   ├── anno_matrix.tsv          <- spot × cell-type proportions
   ├── locs.tsv / locs-raw.tsv  <- spot coordinates
   └── radius.txt / radius-raw.txt  <- spot radius

Batch files (consumed by training)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   <batches_dir>/
   ├── batch_vis_000_x.npy   [N, T, C] float16  -- Visium spot tokens
   ├── batch_vis_000_y.npy   [N, K]    float32  -- soft proportions from RCTD
   ├── batch_vis_000_d.npy   [N]       int64    -- domain IDs
   ├── batch_xen_000_x.npy   [N, T, C] float16  -- Xenium cell tokens
   ├── batch_xen_000_y.npy   [N, K]    float32  -- one-hot hard labels
   └── batch_xen_000_d.npy   [N]       int64    -- domain IDs

The ``vis`` / ``xen`` prefix determines the loss: ``batch_vis_*`` receives MSE loss; ``batch_xen_*`` receives cross-entropy loss.

Pipeline Steps
--------------

Step 1 — RCTD Deconvolution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Visium only.* Decomposes spot-level gene expression into cell-type proportions.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat rctd --config config/my_run.yaml

Set ``rctd.reference_rds`` to your single-cell reference. Optionally use ``rctd.group_column`` and ``rctd.groups`` for per-group references.

Step 2 — Resolution Check
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Audits image resolution (MPP) across all samples.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat check-resolution --config config/my_run.yaml

If auto-detection fails, set ``preprocess.pixel_size_raw`` to the known MPP value.

Step 3 — Image Preprocessing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data-agnostic — works identically for Visium and Xenium. Rescales images, generates tissue masks, extracts UNI ViT-Large features, and fuses them into ``single_super_emb.h5ad``.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat preprocess --config config/my_run.yaml

   # process specific samples only:
   meowcat preprocess --config config/my_run.yaml --samples GBM001,GBM002

   # resume from a specific substep (1=get_pixel_size, 2=run_preprocess,
   # 3=run_histosweep, 4=extract_features, 5=fuse_features):
   meowcat preprocess --config config/my_run.yaml --start-from 4

Step 3.5 — Visium Metadata Preparation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Visium only.* Prepares metadata from RCTD output and spatial positions, and writes ``embeddings-hist.pickle`` or ``.npy``.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat prepare-visium --config config/my_run.yaml

Step 4a — Visium Batch Preparation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tokenizes Visium spots, applies coreset subsampling, and writes ``.npy`` batch files.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat prepare-visium-batches --config config/my_run.yaml

Step 4b — Xenium Batch Preparation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tokenizes Xenium cells, merges UNI histology features, applies coreset subsampling, and writes ``.npy`` batch files.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat prepare-xenium-batches --config config/my_run.yaml

Step 5 — Training
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat train --config config/my_run.yaml

The training script auto-detects data types from batch filenames:

- Only ``batch_vis_*`` → Visium-only (MSE loss)
- Only ``batch_xen_*`` → Xenium-only (CE loss)
- Both + ``sequential_training: true`` → 3-phase training (recommended)

See :doc:`config` for training paradigm YAML snippets.

Step 6 — Prediction & Visualization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat predict   --config config/my_run.yaml
   meowcat visualize --config config/my_run.yaml

   # or restrict to specific samples:
   meowcat predict   --config config/my_run.yaml --samples P_new1,P_new2
   meowcat visualize --config config/my_run.yaml --samples P_new1,P_new2

``predict`` ensembles all ``n_states`` checkpoints and saves per-pixel cell-type probabilities.
``visualize`` generates argmax cell-type maps and intensity maps.

**Custom color maps:** Set ``visualize.cmap_json`` to a JSON file mapping cell-type names to hex colors.

Step 7 — Slide Wrap
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Assembles all results into a PowerPoint summary deck.

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat slide --config config/my_run.yaml

Inference on New H&E Images
----------------------------

Use ``meowcat infer`` to predict cell types on new H&E images with a previously trained model:

.. code-block:: bash

   meowcat infer --config inference.yaml
   meowcat infer --config inference.yaml --samples HE001,HE002
   meowcat infer --config inference.yaml --start-from 6   # skip preprocessing
   meowcat infer --config inference.yaml --dry-run

Inference config example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   inference:
     model_dir: /path/to/training/batches    # contains states/*/model.ckpt
     anno_names: /path/to/anno-names.txt

   project:
     data_root: /path/to/new_samples
     out_root:  /path/to/output
     sample_pattern: "HE*"

   preprocess:
     raw_flag: he_raw
     target_mpp: 0.5
     uni_weights: /path/to/uni_weights.bin

   predict:
     n_states: 2
     device: cuda

See :doc:`tutorials/06_predict_new_sample` for a complete example.
